  1.0 Introduction
----------------

304 (Pronounced 'three nought four') is a card game popular in Sri
Lanka.  card304 is an electronic version of the same game and may be
played over the internet by four players.  To install card304,
please refer to the download and installation instructions below.


2.0 Basic Rules of 304
----------------------

It can be the followin number of players
2 or 3 or 4 players
In case of 4 players, 2 alternate players become a team


2.1 Card Value and Precedence
-----------------------------

304 uses a standard deck of cards excluding the jokers and cards 2
through 6 in all suites.  So the 304 playing deck consists of 32
cards, 7 through A in all suites.  Each card in a suite has a defined
value (or points) as given below.
	J - 30
	9 - 20
	A - 11
	10 - 10
	K - 3
	Q - 2
	8 - 0
	7 - 0

As can be seen from the table, the order of value of the cards is not
intuitive to newcomers to the game, and it would be useful to get used
to the above order as soon as possible.

During game play, when someone plays a card, it can be beaten only by
a card in the same suite with more points (or by a trump card, see below).

The object of the game is to accumulate a target number of points
*within a team*, i.e. between your partner and yourself. 

A quick calculation will reveal that the total number of points in the
32 card playing deck is 304

2.2 Dealing
-----------

The game begins with the dealer shuffling and dealing out the cards.
- The cards are dealt _four at a time_ to each player
- They are dealt in a  clockwise direction, starting with the
  first player to the dealer's left. 
- Dealer is player and dealer turn changes after every game in clockwise

Before the cards are dealt and after they are shuffled, the first
player to the dealer's left, may cut the deck if s/he so chooses.


cards are dealt starting to the left of the dealer, and proceed clockwise


In 2 and 3 player - 10 cards are dealt to each player in 3 rounds of 4,4,2 cards and the remaining cards are face down at the center
In 4 player game - all 32 cards are dealt - 8 cards each to every player in two rounds of dealing 4 cards each. there is no center pile of cards in 4 players


In 3 player - cards are dealt starting to the right of the dealer. Round 1 4 cards, round 2 4 cards and final round 2 cards. The remainig 2 cards are face down at the centrer

In 4 player - the cards are dealt starting to right of the dealer and goes right


2.3 Bidding
-----------

2.3.1 Four card bid
-------------------

When the dealer has dealt all the cards the bidding
process starts.  

Starting with the first player to the dealer's left, each
player can place a bid, as to how many points he expects his team to
get, were he allowed to choose the trump.


The person with the highest bid is
allowed to choose the suite that would be the trump for that game.
This person will be referred to as 'the trumper' in this doc.  A
'bid' is your estimate of the number of points you or your team
will get, assuming you get to choose the trumps.  If at the end of the
game you meet or exceed the trumper/trumper team wins. IF not the other team wins. One uniqueness is - in 3 player game once the trumper is decided, the other two forma team trying to beat the trumper


The rules of bidding with four cards are as follows
- bids must be in multiples of 10 points
- bids must be higher than half the total number of points; so the
  minimum bid is 150
- you may bid only once
- you may not overbid your partner, unless someone else has overbid
  your partner before you
- 200 and above are considered special bids and have higher
  risk/reward.  If noone has yet bid 200 or higher, and your next bid
  is going to be 200 or higher, you are allowed to break the previous
  two rules, namely you may in this case overbid your partner, and/or
  make a second bid.  
- even when bidding over 200, you may not overbid yourself, unless
  someone else has overbid you first.
- You may pass and not make a bid when it is your turn.  However, this
  will still count as one "bid" as far as the above rules are concerned.
- bidding typically goes in a  clockwise direction starting
  with the person to the immediate left of the dealer.  
- if noone submits a bid, the dealer is forced to bid a minimum which is 150

The number of points won by the trumper/opponent team is as follows

Bid		         Trumper wins		          Trumper loses
150 - 190	      Trumper gets 5 points		opposing team wins 3 points. only in case of 3 player game the opposing team mebers each get 3 points
200 - 300       Trumper gets 6 points   Opposing team wins 5 points. only in case of 3 player game the opposing team mebers each get 5 points
card304         Trumper gets 10 points  Opposing team wins 7 points. only in case of 3 player game the opposing team mebers each get 7 points


======
2.4 The Trump
-------------

The trump is a suite chosen by the player who had the highest bid.  A
card in the trump suite will beat any card in any other suite, however
the trump may be played only if the player does not have any cards in
the calling suite.  When a trump is played to beat a card in a
different suite, that action is called 'cutting' (similar to ruffing
in Bridge).  If two players attempt to cut a given card, the player
who used the higher valued trump card wins.

The trump should be chosen from the first four cards that are dealt to
the player with the highest bid.  He may not look at the rest of his
cards, until he has chosen the trump.  He has to choose his trump from
the suites he has available in the four cards in his hand.  Once he
has decided on the trump suite, he has to pick a card in that suite
from the four cards in his hand, and place that card face down on the
table.  This closed card will be referred to as 'The Trump Card' in this
document.

*The trumper should not announce the trump to the other players.*

Once The Trump Card has been placed face down on the table, the trumper
may pick up his remaining four cards.  The Trump Card may not be used
during normal game play.  The circumstances in which it may be played
are described below.

2.5 Game Play
-------------

The player to the immediate right of the dealer starts the game
play.  Once he has played a card, play proceeds in a counter clockwise
direction.  The next player has to play a card in the same suite as
the first card (this suite is referred to as the calling suite).
Whoever has the highest card in the calling suite after all four
players have played, wins all the cards that were played.  These four
cards are collectively known as a 'trick'. These cards may not be used
again in the game, and should be kept separate from the players hand.
In general, these cards may not be looked at until the end of the
game.  However, a player is allowed to refer to the four cards in the
last trick that was played out.   

The player who won the current trick plays the first card for 
the next trick. 

*It is important to note that the number of tricks won is
irrelevant.  What matters is the _number of points_ in the cards
that are in the tricks won*.

The objective of the team that kept the trump is to get enough
points to deliver on their bid, while the objective of the other team
is to get enough points to prevent the other team from delivering on
their bid.

2.5.1 Cutting
-------------

When a certain card is played on the table if the next player does
not have a card of the same suite, he has two options
- he may attempt to cut
- he may play some other card which is neither the calling suite nor a
  trump

Unless this player is the trumper, he would not know what the trump
is.  So he has to *guess* what the trump might be. Once he has made a
guess, he has to pick a card from his hand which belongs to the
guessed trump suite and play it _face down_ on the table.  

If he chooses the second option and decides to play some other card,
he still has to play it face down.  When a card is played face down,
it tells the other players, that an attempt is being made to either
cut the current trick or to play another suite.  The rest of the
players then play their cards.  

If the trumper does not have a card in the calling suite and he chooses
to cut, he has to cut with The Trump Card if it is currently unplayed.
He may not cut using any other card from the trump suite, while The Trump 
Card is still unplayed.  If he chooses not to cut, the trumper may
play a card face down.  This card may not be a trump.

Viz. If the trumper plays a card face down from his hand, then it
means he is definitely not cutting.  If on the other hand he plays The
Trump Card face down, then his is definitely cutting.  

After all four players have played for the current trick, the trumper,
will examine the cards that were played face down without disclosing
those cards to any of the other players. 

Upon examining the card(s) played face down, the trumper will announce
whether any of the face down cards are of the trump suite or not. If
any of them are of the trump suite, the cut was successful. The face
down card that successfully cut the trick is turned face up and shown
to all the players.  Any other card that was played face down in that
trick, with the exception of a card that may have been played face
down by the trumper himself, should also be turned face up at this
point. In addition, The Trump Card should also be turned face up,
irrespective of whether it was played or not.

If The Trump Card was not played in the trick where a successful cut
was executed, it should now be picked up by the trumper and returned
to his hand.  It is no longer considered The Trump Card, and the
special rules regarding The Trump Card no longer apply to it.

In the event of multiple players guessing the trump correctly, the
player playing the highest valued trump wins the trick.

In the event of none of the players guessing the trump correctly, the
trumper will announce that noone succeeded.  All cards played face
down will remain face down.  These cards may not be looked at by a
player choosing to refer to the last trick.

Once a successful cut has been made by any player, the trump suite is
known to all players.  At this point the trump is said to be
'open'. Once the trump is open, cards should not be played face down
in any circumstances (i.e. all cards should be played face up).

2.5.2 Special Rules for Playing Trumps
--------------------------------------

- Playing The Trump Card:  the trumper may play the trump card if and
only if he is cutting.  Even in the case where the calling suite is
the trump suite, and the trumper has no further cards left in his hand
in the trump suite, he may not play The Trump Card.  (In this case he
would have to play a card of a different suite face down).  The only
time the trumper is allowed to play the Trump Card in a situation in
which he is not cutting, is when he no longer has *any* cards left in
his hand, and the current trick is essentially the last trick of the
game. 

- Open Trump game: Upon receiving all eight cards and before the first
card has been played, the trumper may decide to play an open trump
game.  This is a game in which the trump is known to all the players.
Before the first card is played, the trumper should announce he is
playing an open trump game and turn The Trump Card face up.  Once
everyone has seen the Trump Card, it is returned to the trumper's hand
and is no longer considered The Trump Card.

Tactical Note: There are certain situations when an open trump game is
desirable, for example if the game strategy requires your partner to
cut the first trick. However, in general a closed trump game is more
advantageous to the trumper.

- Playing trumps in the first trick: If the trumper happens to be the
player to the immediate right of the dealer, then he has to play the
first card to begin the game.  In a closed trump game, the trumper may
not play trumps in this situation.  If he wishes to begin the game
playing trumps, he has to play an open trump game.

Viz. in such a situation in a closed trump game, the possible trump
suites are narrowed down from four to three, for the other players
trying to guess the trump. 

- Playing Exhausted Trumps: A situation in which the trumper has
all the remaining trumps in the game is called Exhausted Trumps. If
the trumper is playing first in a trick, and he begins the trick by
playing trumps when they are exhausted, none of the other players
will be able to respond with trumps. If this occurs the trumper has to
keep playing trumps until he himself has no further trumps in his
hand. Thus it is very important for the trumper to keep track of the
number of trumps outside his control.

- Spoilt Trumps: Once all eight cards have been picked up by the
players and play commences, it may turn out that all eight trumps were
split between the trumper and his partner.  In effect, the opposing
team never had any trumps in this game.  Such a game is called a
'spoilt game' or 'spoilt trump game'.  It is declared invalid, and no
payout is made.  All the cards are collected by the dealer and the
game is restarted.  It is up to the team opposing the trumper to call
a spoilt trump game.  If they are unable to spot a spoilt trump game,
the trumper's team may either call a spoilt trump game or continue to
play and collect their winnings at the end.  A spoilt trump game has
to be called before the last card in the last trick is played.


2.6 Eight Card Bid
------------------

Once everyone has seen all eight cards dealt to them, but before the
first card in the first trick is played, another round of bidding is
allowed.  The trumper is given the first chance at an eight card bid,
and bidding progresses in a counter clockwise direction from there.

The rules for an eight card bid are as follows
- the minimum bid is either 250 or the current four card bid amount,
  whichever is _higher_
- you may not overbid your partner
- you may not bid more than once
- any bids made during the four card bid phase have no bearing once
  an eight card bid has been made; whoever was the trumper based on
  the four card bid is no longer the trumper and he has to return The
  Trump Card to his hand.  A new Trump Card will be chosen by the
  winner of the eight card bid

If no eight card bids are made, the game proceeds as described above
with the result of the four card bid.  If an eight card bid is made,
the new highest bidder becomes the trumper.  He can choose The Trump
Card from the eight cards in his hand.  The payout is similar to the
payout for four card bids.

A note on reasonable bidding: the average trick is worth 38 points.
This means to deliver a bid of 250, you need to be confident of
winning at least seven of the eight tricks in a game.

2.6.1. Special Rules for bids of 250 or higher
----------------------------------------------

For games with a bid of 250 or higher, certain special rules apply.
If the trumper chooses to play a closed trump game, only the first
trick is played as a closed trump game.  At the end of the first
trick, the Trump Card is turned face up and shown to all the players.
It is then returned to the trumper's hand and no longer considered the
Trump Card.  

Viz. in a closed trump game with a bid of 250 or higher, the trumps
are unknown only for the first trick.


3.0 Deciding the result of a game
---------------------------------

Once all eight tricks are played out, the total points of all the
cards won by the trumper's team are calculated.  If this is found to
be equal to or higher than the bid amount, the trumper's team is
declared the winner and wins the payoff. If not, the other team is the
winner and wins the charge. In either case, the margin by which the
bid is exceeded or missed is of no relevance and winnings are
calculated based only on the payoff/charge table above. The 
winning team is paid its winnings by the losing team.  

It is customary to start the game with 11 tokens per team.  The object
of the game is to win all your opposing team's tokens.

In other versions of 304 the losing team pays out its losses to a
neutral 'bank', and no winnings are collected.  The first team to lose
all its tokens loses the set.  This is increasingly popular, because
it finishes a set of games sooner than the traditional rules do.


4.0 Comprehensive Rules
-----------------------

The following are rules and special situations, not strictly
observed or encountered by beginners but still very much a part of the game.

4.1 Communication
-----------------

No verbal, signed or any such communication is allowed between
players during a game, other than what is possible by the playing of
the cards and stating of bids.  At the conclusion of a game and
before the cards are dealt for the next game, communication is allowed.


4.2 Rule Violations
-------------------

Violation of any of the rules results in the opposing team being
awarded the current game with its winnings plus two more tokens.  This
includes incorrectly calling spoilt games, or otherwise inadvertantly
breaking the rules.


4.3 Caps
--------

Winning all eight tricks in the game is called Caps, similar to a Slam
in Bridge.  (This is the only situation where tricks and not the
number of points matters in 304).  Even if the winning team wins all
304 points but loses a trick, it is not considered Caps.

If a team executes Caps in a game, it is awarded the winnings based on
the bid, plus one more token.  However, to execute Caps in a game, it
is not sufficient to win all eight tricks.  In addition to this,

*The winning team must call Caps as soon as it is evident to any one
player in the team that they can win all tricks in the current game, 

and 

that player states the exact order in which the rest of his/her cards
should be played to execute Caps

and

Caps is called before the first card in the seventh trick is
played.*


- when calling Caps one is not allowed to assume any intelligence on
the part of any of the other players, including one's partner.  So to
call Caps, the player must rely on his play and only that the other
players will follow the rules.

Viz. it is possible that assuming some intelligence in your partner's
play, at some point it becomes evident to you that you are going to
win all the tricks in the current game, but you cannot do it on your
own. This is not sufficient grounds to call Caps. 

Viz2. it is possible that based on your play alone, at some point it
is evident to you that you will win all the tricks in the current
game, but you are still not sure of the exact order in which you have
to play your cards, since that depends on some other player's
response.  This is not sufficient grounds to call Caps.

- If Caps is called too late or too early (or not at all when it
  should have been), that is referred to as Wrong Caps.  The team that
  called late/early is penalised as described below. 

- If a Wrong Caps is called, but the team that called it does win all
  eight tricks, it is penalized two tokens.  It may not collect any
  winnings for that game based on its bid.

- If Caps is called at any point but the team calling Caps actually
  loses a trick in that game, it is penalized five tokens and it may not
  collect any winnings for that game based on its bid.

- If at some point a team realises it should have called Caps earlier,
  (and therefore is in Wrong Caps) it may not attempt to intentionally
  lose a trick to hide its failing.  If this is spotted by the
  opposing team, the Wrong Caps penalty will apply.

- Even if it is not possible to call Caps before the first card in the
  seventh trick is played, the above rules still apply.  However, the
  extra token for calling and executing Caps correctly may not be
  collected in this case.  Only the normal winnings for delivering on
  the bid are paid out.

Tactical Note: As can be seen, Caps is a way of balancing out a game
that for some reason has become highly skewed in one team's favor.
When facing a Caps situation, it serves the losing team to play in a
'bad' and confusing manner, thus making it difficult for the winning
team to call Caps at the right time.

Conventional Note: A situation where the team opposing the trumper
correctly executes Caps is referred to as External Caps.  In some
versions of 304, execution of External Caps is awarded eight tokens
including the winnings for the current game.  This is an older version
of the game and not generally followed today.

4.3.1 Partner Close Caps
------------------------

In the eight card bidding stage an additional bid is allowed which is
referred to as Partner Close Caps.  This is the highest bid possible,
and the first person to call it automatically becomes the trumper.  

The trumper's partner does not take part in a Partner Close game.  The
trumper always plays first in a Partner Close game, and play proceeds
counter clockwise, skipping the trumper's partner.  No other player
may look at the trumper's partner's cards until the game is over.  All
the other rules for a 250+ bid game apply to a Partner Close game,
with the following exceptions:
- it is not necessary to call Caps in such a game.  To correctly
deliver on the bid, it is sufficient to win all eight tricks. 
- the Exhausted Trump Rule does not apply

If Partner Close Caps is correctly executed, the payoff is four
tokens, while the charge for not doing so is five tokens.


4.4 Shuffling Rules
-------------------

A frequent complaint of beginners to 304 is that there seems to be
some blatant manipulation of cards during shuffling.  The rules
governing shuffling are:
- the dealer may not look at the face of any of the cards while
  shuffling or dealing
- the dealer may not arrange cards in a certain way before the shuffle
- the dealer may not count out cards or attempt to move cards on an
  individual basis during the shuffle 
- the deck should not be split between shuffles -- after each shuffle,
  the deck must be a homogenous whole
- the shuffling and dealing must be done in such a way that it is
  clearly visible to all the players

What is not required is that the cards be shuffled thoroughly.  Thus
an attempt is sometimes made to shuffle the cards minimally, or in
whatever way that is perceived to give the dealer an advantage.  It is
fair to say, that any advantage that may be achieved by this can
easily be nullified by intelligently cutting the deck before it is
dealt. All the rules of shuffling apply to cutting as well.


5.0 The rules of card304
------------------------

The electronic version of 304 is card304.  In the alpha version of
card304, certain modes of play are not yet implemented and the rules
have been accordingly modified.

A summary of these modifications are:
- Eight Card bidding is not allowed
- Only one bid per player is allowed in the Four Card bidding stage
- Open Trump games are not allowed
- The exhausted trump rule is not followed (Sujee, this seems easy to implement..)
- Caps cannot be called.  All games including Caps games are played
  out like regular games.
- Since the shuffling/dealing and cutting are done electronically and
  in a fair manner, the rules regarding these are no longer
  applicable.


